# Machine Learning Project
### Music Classification

This repository contains our project for a Machine Learning class. 

The aim is to create a system that can find songs that are similar based on the audio parameters. Music services recommend music based on tags and what other users like. However, this doesn't help promote music that a user may like based on music preference because a song may not be popular. Furthermore, some tags are broad and may not fully describe a musical type. 

A set of songs will be categorized by how similar to each other they sound to us (the group). A 4 means that two songs that are being compared are very similar in style. This does not mean they sound exactly the same but they would share a subgenre and fanbase. A 3 means that two songs are similar in general style and would have overlapping fanbase. For example, heavy metal and slower classic rock use similar instruments and musical scales but at different tempos and levels of distortion. A 2 means that two songs are loosely related. An example might be a blues song and a R&B song. The R&B song may have elements of the blues but listening to these two songs by side there are more differences than similarities. A 1 means the only similarity two songs share may just be instruments used. A 0 would be little similarity, perhaps like a classical piano solo and a hip-hop bass and drum instrumental.

The song similarity ratings was created and stored in an excel file. Multiple versions were created with varying similarity values ranges and 3-4 was kept as the best. Also, other versions contained other songs but the dataset that is most recent has the least genres but most songs per genre to simplify data variance. 'Song Correlation Groups4' is the most recent file with ratings.
A nueral network was utilized to find a model that can measure similarity between two songs based on the excel file. The tempo, sample rate, mel spectrogram, and percussive elements of each song were used as predictors in the 'Machine Learning Project' file. In the end, the accuracy of identifying a similar song from our database was very low. The reason for this may most likely be due to the fact that there was not enough songs and data for the neural network to train on. Due to limitations in hardware howevever, the song data set had to be limited as it took a very long time to load and process in the program. In the future, an expanded dataset as well as a stronger GPU will be necessary in order to effectively load and extract information from the songs. An increased dataset will likely yield better results. Just using the raw audio yielded better results, although it took longer, and this can be seen in the 'Machine Learning Project-Raw Audio' file.

Papers that have been published by Juan Bello, a professor at NYU Steinhardt, served as starting points on how to quantify musical qualities. The musical analysis tools that have been utilized in our program to extract musical features from songs come from the Librosa package. The Librosa documentation offered examples on how to utilize these tools and functions well.
